h2. Connectors

Connectors are a mechanism to adapt ubiquo to your own requirements. They are:

* Flexible, extensible
* Hot-swappable
* Testable

endprologue.

h3. Idea

There are certain portions of code that can have a standard behaviour, but that
you might want to customize, without rewriting a lot of parts.

For example, in the ubiquo_categories plugin, you will need slightly different code
depending if you want simply generic categories to tag models, or if you want
these tags to be translatable, versionable or both at the same time.

Although using modules and injecting them works in some cases, there are other situations
where you will find yourself overwritting methods, copying chunks of code and overall, monkeypatching.

The idea is to provide hooks inside the code, in certain parts where, if you want some
custom behaviour, you will need to modify the code. These hooks are called with a defined set
of parameters, and are expected to be executed in the same execution context (e.g.
inside the controller). A set of hook implementations is called a _connector_.

In Ubiquo itself, some plugins use connectors to optionally deliver certain features.
For example, ubiquo_media can work with or without i18n. In some projects, you may want
to have a central repository of images, and that's all. In other apps, you might want
the ability to share images between, for example, articles that are translations of the same item.

Without connectors, there would be plenty of "ifs" to determine what to do in these situations.
Now, add versioning to this equation. If you can choose whether to add tracking of the history of an image or not,
and choose whether i18n is or not activated, there are already potentially 4 "ifs"
for each specific behaviour. As you can see, this is not maintainable, and leads to confusing, spaghetti code.

Calling a hook allows to separate the code required for each of these functionalities. Then, we just "connect" the
piece of code we want into the application, as another configuration option:

<ruby>
Ubiquo::Config.context(:ubiquo_media).set(:connector, :i18n)
</ruby>

And voilà, now the plugin behaves the way we want.

h3. Implementation

Connectors are implemented as collections of modules. Each module implements the defined hooks in a specific Ubiquo class or module
(i.e., there is a separate module for a given model, another one for a controller, etc).

Connectors are inheritable. If you inherit from another connector, you will have to implement
only the hooks that differ from the original implementation. There are some limitations, or quirks,
due to the way Ruby inheritance works for modules and classes. We'll cover them later.

Inside every plugin, the connectors are completely independent. However, there are some
conventions that allow Ubiquo to reuse a lot of code. These are:

* In every plugin there is a Base connector. This connector contains all the common logic that all the implementations will share.
* All the connector implementations inherit from Base (directly or indirectly)
* The Base connector inherits from _Ubiquo::Connectors::Base_, which in turn bundles all the connector loading mechanisms
* There is a load! method called when the connector is loaded. Here, you can place all your high level modifications.
* There is also an unload! method, which ideally performs any required cleanup to leave the application as it was before the connector was loaded.
* The Standard connector provides the bare functionality. Contains implementation for all the defined hooks (which by convention are methods starting by _uhook_)
* Then, basically, to implement a new connector, you implement the uhooks defined in Standard with your own custom code.

The best way to learn about connectors is, guess what, looking at existing ones.

h4. Testing

Connectors are designed to be hot-swappable and testable. This doesn't mean that testing them won't require some adjustement.
Given that connectors are run in the same context where the uhooks are called,
in some circumstances we will need to mock methods that are not available in the test environment.

There will normally be one test file per each connector, including the base.
The idea of base tests is the following: test what happens on load time, and then test, for each connector, the interface of the uhook.

Testing the interface provides a way for connectors to know that they won't break anything:
you can't test the inner code or the behaviour, but you can test the shape of the answer.

The following examples are from ubiquo_media. First, the tests about the load of the plugin:

<ruby>
  Base = UbiquoMedia::Connectors::Base

  test 'should_load_correct_modules' do
    ::Asset.expects(:include).with(Base::Asset)
    ::AssetRelation.expects(:include).with(Base::AssetRelation)
    ::Ubiquo::AssetsController.expects(:include).with(Base::UbiquoAssetsController)
    ::ActiveRecord::Migration.expects(:include).with(Base::Migration)
    ::ActiveRecord::Base.expects(:include).with(Base::ActiveRecord::Base)
    Base.expects(:set_current_connector).with(Base)
    Base.load!
  end

  test 'should_set_current_connector_on_load' do
    save_current_connector(:ubiquo_media)
    Base.load!
    assert_equal Base, Base.current_connector
    reload_old_connector(:ubiquo_media)
  end
</ruby>

And some examples of interface testing:

<ruby>
  test_each_connector(:ubiquo_media) do

    test "uhook_create_assets_table_should_create_table" do
      ActiveRecord::Migration.expects(:create_table).with(:assets, anything)
      ActiveRecord::Migration.uhook_create_assets_table {}
    end

    test 'uhook_index_filters_should_return_hash' do
      mock_assets_controller
      assert Ubiquo::AssetsController.new.uhook_index_filters.is_a?(Hash)
    end

    test 'uhook_destroy_asset_should_destroy_asset' do
      mock_assets_controller
      Asset.any_instance.expects(:destroy).returns(:value)
      assert_equal :value, Ubiquo::AssetsController.new.uhook_destroy_asset(Asset.new)
    end
  end
</ruby>


h3. Overwriting an uhook in your application

You can read this post from Ubiquo Planet: "How to override an Ubiquo::Connector":http://planet.ubiquo.me/79728846

h3. Changelog

"Lighthouse tickets":http://ubiquo.lighthouseapp.com/projects/31609-ubiquo-guides/tickets?q=tagged%3Aconnectors
